SWI-4309: New SAI P4 Extensions API and Proposal (#1)
barefootnetworks/SAI: doc/SAIP4Extensions/SAI_P4EXT_API_Proposal.md

SAI P4EXT API Proposal
=====================

> Title       | SAI IPsec API Proposal

Reviewer: P4 Extension

> Title       | SAI IPsec API Proposal

Reviewer 2: Change Title - "**IPsec""

------------|----------------------
Authors     | Intel.
Status      | Draft
Type        | Standards track
Created     | 03/18/2021
SAI-Version | ?
-------------------------------

# Scope #

> This document defines the technical specifications for the API used to support P4 Extensions in Open Compute Project Switch Abstraction Interface (SAI). P4 Extensions can be seen as an abstraction over niche/device specific capabilities. It facilitates programming of these new features via the familiar SAI API model using a single P4 Extension Object. The exact feature enabled via the P4 Extensions itself is outside the scope of this document and SAI P4 Extensions API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines the technical specifications for the API used to support P4 Extensions in Open Compute Project Switch Abstraction Interface (SAI). P4 Extensions can be seen as an abstraction over niche/device specific features. It facilitates programming of these new features via the familiar SAI API model using a single P4 Extension object type. The exact feature enabled via the P4 Extensions itself is outside the scope of this document and SAI P4 Extensions API.
```

# Overview #

> SAI P4 extension introduces a single new SAI object SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY of object_type_oid. This object along with its attributes provides an abstraction of target specific configurable features otherwise not described in SAI via the P4 match action paradigm in a feature agnostic manner. In contrast to other SAI objects which are mapped 1:1 to an entity in the SAI Pipeline Netwokring Object Model, for eg. VLAN, Neighbor, Mirror etc.; SAI P4 Extensions introduces 1:N mapping between the  SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY object and niche features Feature1, Feature2, etc. This new paradigm enables the

Reviewer: We should explain how the P4 language enables describing the features and then segue into explaining the attributes and how they map to the P4 language.

Reviewer: what is object_type_oid?

Reviewer: Networking typo

Author: > what is object_type_oid?

SAI objects can be key based or oid based [sai_metadata_is_object_type_oid(object_type)](https://github.com/barefootnetworks/SAI/blob/master/inc/saiobject.h#L48-L55)

1. Ability to add exclusive features
2. Expose device specific capabilities
3. Rapid application prototyping
4. Ability to introduce new features potentially without Recompiling SAI

## Object Dependencies ##

> In the current SAI P4 Extension Proposal the newly introduced SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY shall remain disconnected from the SAI Pipeline Object Graph. In other words there shall be no dependency from/to other SAI object to/from SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY. Also the proposal places no restriction on the relative placement of the new features/table in the SAI Pipeline. The implementation and interaction of the new feature with the SAI pipeline is left to each individual vendor.Vendor A and Vendor B may choose to implement different sets of features using the new SAI P4 extension object. While a Vendor C may decide to not implement any new features using SAI P4 extensions.

Reviewer: I think we should move this to a restrictions section later. No point confusing reader at this point.

Author: Actually I think I saw some proposals that explain the dependency of new object on other sai objects or vice versa upfront. So I decided to keep it at the top. This also sets the expectations correctly upfront, that the proposal does not allow for any cross references between P4 Extension object and other SAI objects

Reviewer: Got it.

Reviewer: "Vendor A and Vendor B may choose to implement different sets of features using the new SAI P4 extension object. While a Vendor C may decide to not implement any new features using SAI P4 extensions."
This whole section I think is unnecessary.

# API Specification #
This section describes SAI P4 Extension API Proposal

## New header file saip4ext.h ##

> The new header file defines interfaces for a single object of type P4EXT_ENTRY. This new object mimics a P4 table entity. The attributes of the object define the vairous P4 table constructs such as table name, match key, action name and action parameters. Each of these attributes is defined as  string type. For target that are P4 compatible these strings can simply be set to corresponding P4 table construct.

Reviewer: various typo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new header file defines interfaces for a single object of type P4EXT_ENTRY. This new object mimics a P4 table entity. The attributes of the object define the various P4 table constructs such as table name, match key, action name and action parameters. Each of these attributes is defined as  string type. For targets that are P4 compatible, these strings can simply be set to corresponding P4 table construct.
```

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestion : Perhaps, it's better to use "SAI implementation" or "Vendor implementation" instead of target.

> The new header file defines interfaces for a single object of type P4EXT_ENTRY. This new object mimics a P4 table entity. The attributes of the object define the vairous P4 table constructs such as table name, match key, action name and action parameters. Each of these attributes is defined as  string type. For target that are P4 compatible these strings can simply be set to corresponding P4 table construct.

Reviewer 2: Typo - va*irous

Reviewer 2: "For target that are P4 compatible these strings can simply be set to corresponding P4 table construct." This statement seems to imply that p4 compatibility is optional and not a mandatory requirement????

Author: The target in itself may or may not run a P4 program. But the SDE/SAI implementation from a vendor can have a mapping library that maps the P4 Extension SAI API calls via some translation logic to corresponding driver APIs. This translation could be something that is static and hence would need recompilation any time a new feature is added or dynamic

Reviewer: I think you framed this right. Put this in the text somehow.

### SAI P4EXT Entry Attributes ###
*sai_p4ext_entry_attr_t* defines the SAI P4 Extension Attributes. Each of the attributes is of type string. As seen below the attributes mimic P4 table attributes such as table name, match fields (key:value pairs), action field (key:value pairs), action paramters (key:value pairs). The format for each of these string attribute values will be described later in the API usage section.

```cpp
/**
 * @brief Attribute Id for P4 ext */
typedef enum _sai_p4ext_entry_attr_t
{
    /**
     * @brief Start of attributes
     */
    SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_START,

    /**
     * @brief SAI P4 EXT table id
     *
     * @type sai_s8_list_t
     * @flags CREATE_AND_SET
     * @default empty
     */
    SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_TABLE_ID = SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_START,

    /**
     * @brief SAI P4 EXT Match field
     *
     * @type sai_s8_list_t
     * @flags CREATE_AND_SET
     * @default empty
     */

>     SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_MATCH_FIELD_ID,

Reviewer 2: Do we need _ID in the name here?

Author: I agree that _ID suffix is not needed here and is misleading. I chose to retain the attr names from the original header file since they were already being used in PINS SONiC. But I can change them

    /**
     * @brief SAI P4 EXT Action id
     *
     * @type sai_s8_list_t
     * @flags CREATE_AND_SET
     * @default empty
     */
    SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_ACTION_ID,

    /**
     * @brief SAI P4 EXT Action parameters
     *
     * @type sai_s8_list_t
     * @flags CREATE_AND_SET
     * @default empty
     */

>     SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_PARAMETER_ID,

Reviewer 2: Same comment as MATCH_FIELD_ID.

 * @param[in] attr Attribute
 *
 * @return #SAI_STATUS_SUCCESS on success, failure status code on error
 */
typedef sai_status_t (*sai_set_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn)(
        _In_ sai_object_id_t p4ext_entry_id,
        _In_ const sai_attribute_t *attr);

/**
 * @brief Get P4 entry attribute
 *
 * @param[in] p4ext_entry_id P4 table id
 * @param[in] attr_count Number of attributes
 * @param[inout] attr_list Array of attributes
 *
 * @return #SAI_STATUS_SUCCESS on success, failure status code on error
 */
typedef sai_status_t (*sai_get_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn)(
        _In_ sai_object_id_t p4ext_entry_id,
        _In_ uint32_t attr_count,
        _Inout_ sai_attribute_t *attr_list);
```

### SAI P4 Extension API Table ###

```cpp
/**
 * @brief P4Ext  methods table retrieved with sai_api_query()
 **/
typedef struct _sai_p4ext_api_t
{
    sai_create_p4ext_entry_fn                     create_p4ext_entry;
    sai_remove_p4ext_entry_fn                     remove_p4ext_entry;
    sai_set_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn              set_p4ext_entry_attribute;
    sai_get_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn              get_p4ext_entry_attribute;
} sai_p4ext_api_t;

```

# API Usage #

> Consider a scenario where a Vendor A wishes to extend the SAI pipeline functionality with a custom feature not yet supported in SAI on a target that is P4 compliant. Let say this new feature classifies incoming packets based on packet field tuples SIP,DIP and sets the traffic class tc. As mentioned earlier the proposal does not deal with the implementation details of data pipeline by each individual vendor, thus the relative position of this table in the SAI pipeline is not part of the specification and is vendor dependent. Its upto the vendor to decide whether this table will come after the SAI QoS tables or before and resolve any conflict that would arise from the actions of the QoS tables and the new P4 Extension Table. This simple feature can be expressed in P4 as below.

Reviewer 2: Why do we want to limit this extension to "P4 compliant" devices. I think this generic extension can be used to program features/tables in non-P4 devices as well.

Reviewer 2: Alternate wording - "Consider a scenario where a Vendor A wishes to extend the SAI pipeline functionality with a custom feature which can be modeled with a P4 match-action table but is not yet supported in SAI."

> ```

Reviewer: add the the set_tc action also and describe what is a match field, action and action parameter here.

Reviewer 3: How does application use existing SAI objects in the P4Ext APIs?

Author: @kperumalbfn Currently SAI P4 Extension Object does not include referencing capability innately. In fact it is hard to have such a thing if we stick by the current SAI object model. Unlike other SAI objects which have dedicated attributes to refer to one of the other SAI object type(s),  SAI P4 Extension Object model clubs together all the object attributes within a single parameter with a generic string type. Since we do not define or lay any guidelines for what the strings contain exactly nor their format, it is hard to encode any referencing information within.

table flow_classification {
    key = {

>         ig_md.lkp.ip_src_addr[95:64] : ternary @name("src_addr");

Reviewer 2: please change [95:64] to [31:0]. It's just an unnecessary distraction.

        ig_md.lkp.ip_dst_addr[95:64] : ternary @name("dst_addr");
    }
    actions = {
        set_tc;
    }
}
```

> ## Creatoing a P4 Extension Table Entry ##

Reviewer 2: Creat*ing - Typo

```cpp
#define P4_TABLE_NAME "flow_classification"
#define P4_TABLE_MATCH_FIELDS "{\"priority\":100,\"src_addr\":\"10.1.1.0&255.255.255.0\"}"
#define P4_TABLE_ACTION "set_tc" 
#define P4_TABLE_ACTION_PARAMETERS "{\"tc\":\"4\"}"

sai_object_id_t p4ext_entry_id = {};
uint8_t num_attrs = 4;
sai_attribute_id_t p4ext_entry_attrs[num_attrs] = {};
p4ext_entry_attrs[0].id = (sai_attr_id_t) SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_TABLE_ID;
p4ext_entry_attrs[0].value.s8list.count = strlen(P4_TABLE_NAME);

> p4ext_entry_attrs[0].value.s8list.value = (sai_s8_list_t.list)P4_TABLE_NAME;  	//P4 Table Name

Reviewer: The formatting looks weird here. Move the comments to the top to make it easier to read

SAI P4EXT API Proposal
=====================

Title       | SAI P4 Extensions Proposal
------------|----------------------
Authors     | Intel.
Status      | Draft
Type        | Standards track

> Created     | 03/18/2021

Reviewer: Update date

SAI-Version | ?
-------------------------------

# Scope #

This document defines the technical specifications for the API used to support P4 Extensions in Open Compute Project Switch Abstraction Interface (SAI). P4 Extensions can be seen as an abstraction over niche/device specific features. It facilitates programming of these new features via the familiar SAI API model using a single P4 Extension object type. The exact feature enabled via the P4 Extensions itself is outside the scope of this document and SAI P4 Extensions API.

> 

Reviewer 4: @ravi861 , @mkbalani do we need any glossary or do we expect reader reviewer to be familiar with P4 and P4RT

# Overview #

SAI P4 extension introduces a single new SAI object SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY of object_type_oid. This object along with its attributes provides an abstraction of target specific configurable features otherwise not described in SAI via the P4 match action paradigm in a feature agnostic manner. In contrast to other SAI objects which are mapped 1:1 to an entity in the SAI Pipeline Networking Object Model, for e.g., VLAN, Neighbor, Mirror etc.; SAI P4 Extensions introduces 1:N mapping between the  SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY object and niche features Feature1, Feature2, etc. This new paradigm enables the

> 1. Ability to add exclusive features

Reviewer 4: Replace for e.g., with either for example or e.g.

2. Expose device specific capabilities
3. Rapid application prototyping
4. Ability to introduce new features potentially without Recompiling SAI

## Object Dependencies ##

In the current SAI P4 Extension Proposal the newly introduced SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY shall remain disconnected from the SAI Pipeline Object Graph. In other words, there shall be no dependency from/to other SAI object to/from SAI_OBJECT_TYPE_P4EXT_ENTRY. Also, the proposal places no restriction on the relative placement of the new features/table in the SAI Pipeline. The implementation and interaction of the new feature with the SAI pipeline is left to each individual vendor.

> 

Reviewer 4: Not sure what SONiC terminology is: is it there shall be no or there MUST NOT

# API Specification #
This section describes SAI P4 Extension API Proposal

## New header file saip4ext.h ##

> The new header file defines interfaces for a single object of type P4EXT_ENTRY. This new object mimics a P4 table entity. The attributes of the object define the various P4 table constructs such as table name, match key, action name and action parameters. Each of these attributes is defined as string type. For SAI implementations that are P4 compatible, these strings can simply be set to corresponding P4 table construct. For SAI implementations that do not express their pipeline in P4, a mapping library can be implemented to map the P4 Extension SAI API calls via some translation logic to corresponding driver APIs. This translation could be static, in which case the SAI recompilation would become necessary to implement a new feature or it could be dynamic.

Reviewer 4: Is the entry mimicking a P4 Table Entity or an entry in a P4 Table Entity ? Isn't it possible that each entry is going to a different P4 table ?

 * @param[in] attr Attribute
 *
 * @return #SAI_STATUS_SUCCESS on success, failure status code on error
 */
typedef sai_status_t (*sai_set_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn)(
        _In_ sai_object_id_t p4ext_entry_id,
        _In_ const sai_attribute_t *attr);

/**
 * @brief Get P4 entry attribute
 *
 * @param[in] p4ext_entry_id P4 table id
 * @param[in] attr_count Number of attributes
 * @param[inout] attr_list Array of attributes
 *
 * @return #SAI_STATUS_SUCCESS on success, failure status code on error
 */
typedef sai_status_t (*sai_get_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn)(
        _In_ sai_object_id_t p4ext_entry_id,
        _In_ uint32_t attr_count,
        _Inout_ sai_attribute_t *attr_list);
```

### SAI P4 Extension API Table ###

```cpp
/**
 * @brief P4Ext  methods table retrieved with sai_api_query()
 **/
typedef struct _sai_p4ext_api_t
{
    sai_create_p4ext_entry_fn                     create_p4ext_entry;
    sai_remove_p4ext_entry_fn                     remove_p4ext_entry;
    sai_set_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn              set_p4ext_entry_attribute;
    sai_get_p4ext_entry_attribute_fn              get_p4ext_entry_attribute;
} sai_p4ext_api_t;

```

# API Usage #

> Consider a scenario where a Vendor A wishes to extend the SAI pipeline functionality with a custom feature which can be modeled with a P4 match-action table but is not yet supported in SAI. Let say this new feature classifies incoming packets based on packet field tuples SIP,DIP and sets the traffic class tc. As mentioned earlier the proposal does not deal with the implementation details of data pipeline by each individual vendor, thus the relative position of this table in the SAI pipeline is not part of the specification and is vendor dependent. It's up to the vendor to decide whether this table will come after the SAI QoS tables or before and resolve any conflict that would arise from the actions of the QoS tables and the new P4 Extension Table. This simple feature can be expressed in P4 as below.

Reviewer 4: SIP,DIP to SIP, DIP

```
table flow_classification {
    action set_tc(switch_tc_t tc) {
        ig_md.qos.etrap_tc = tc;
    }

    key = {

>         ig_md.lkp.ip_src_addr[31:0] : ternary @name("src_addr");

Reviewer: Let us just rename this and make it more explicit. hdr.ipv4.src_addr is simpler to understand.

        ig_md.lkp.ip_dst_addr[31:0] : ternary @name("dst_addr");
    }
    actions = {
        set_tc;
    }
}
```

The above P4 table - *flow_classification*, has two key/ match fields.

> 1. *src_addr* - This is the incoming packet 32 bit Source IP Address

Reviewer: Change to: This is the incoming packet IPv4 source address

2. *dst_addr* - This is the incoming packet 32 bit Destination IP Address
The type of match for both these fields is ternary. In general the match_kind is expected to be one of the match_kinds
as defined by the P4 core library. More information please refer to the [P4 16
Specification](https://p4.org/p4-spec/docs/P4-16-v1.0.0-spec.html#sec-match-kind-type)
In addition the above table describes just one possible action - *set_tc*. An incoming packet that matches an entry in
the above table can be programmed to execute this action. The action *set_tc* accepts only one parameter *tc* which is used

> to sed etrap_tc metadata in the P4 data pipeline

Reviewer: typo "set" instead of "sed". Fix formatting to 80 chars per line.

## Creating a P4 Extension Table Entry ##

```cpp
#define P4_TABLE_NAME "flow_classification"

> #define P4_TABLE_MATCH_FIELDS "{\"priority\":100,\"src_addr\":\"10.1.1.0&255.255.255.0\"}"

Reviewer: There is no restriction here on the format of the context other than being a string. Should we mention here we are using JSON as an example and that there is no restriction?

Author: This was the part I was not clear about. Wouldn't explicitly stating that the attr strings can be any arbitrary strings create a push back from the community?

Reviewer: Conversely, we may get questions on why JSON. Let us discuss this in the meeting.

Reviewer 4: Is it not possible to validate these strings thru json generated by compiler. I understand it may not be standard..

#define P4_TABLE_ACTION "set_tc"
#define P4_TABLE_ACTION_PARAMETERS "{\"tc\":\"4\"}"

sai_object_id_t p4ext_entry_id = {};
uint8_t num_attrs = 4;
sai_attribute_id_t p4ext_entry_attrs[num_attrs] = {};

p4ext_entry_attrs[0].id = (sai_attr_id_t) SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_TABLE_ID;
p4ext_entry_attrs[0].value.s8list.count = strlen(P4_TABLE_NAME);
/** P4 Table Name */
p4ext_entry_attrs[0].value.s8list.value = (sai_s8_list_t.list)P4_TABLE_NAME;

p4ext_entry_attrs[1].id = (sai_attr_id_t) SAI_P4EXT_ENTRY_ATTR_MATCH_FIELD_ID;
p4ext_entry_attrs[1].value.s8list.count = strlen(P4_TABLE_MATCH_FIELDS);
/**

>  * Map of match field names and values represented as a string.

Reviewer: Map is confusing here. It is actually a list represented as a map. Lets just say "Match field keys and values represented as a string".
Same for later occurences.
